Introduction
All eyes turned to the trees. A horseman rode out, toward the Roman
army. There was something strange about the way he was riding
Maximus was the first to understand . . .
As the horse came closer, the other men could see what had happened.
The Roman messenger was tied to his horse. His head had been cut off.
Maximus knew now what he had to do. Life was suddenly simple.
General Maximus, Commander of the Roman Army of the
North, fights his last battle in the war against Germania. Then, he
hopes to return to his farm and his family in Spain.
But there are many serious problems in Rome and Emperor
Marcus Aurelius knows he will soon die. Maximus realizes that
he must perform another duty for the Emperor before he can go
home. He knows it will not be easy, and he is right. Soon he is
fighting for his life again, first as a prisoner, then a slave, and
finally as a gladiator.
One thought keeps Maximus alive: that he will finally meet
and kill the man he hates most—the new Emperor, Commodus.
The book, Gladiator, was written by Dewey Gram. The
screenplay by David Franzoni, John Logan, and William
Nicholson was made into a very successful movie. The movie
stars Russell Crowe as Maximus and Joaquin Phoenix as
Commodus. British actor Oliver Reed (Proximo) died before the
movie was finished, although almost all his scenes had been
completed.
On film and on paper, Gladiator is a very exciting story.
ivChapter 1 Farmer and Soldier
At the height of its power, the great Roman Empire stretched
from the deserts of Africa to the borders of northern England.
Over one quarter of the world’s population lived and died under
the rule of the Caesars.*
In the winter of A.D.† 180, Emperor Marcus Aurelius’s twelve-
year war against the people of Germania was coming to an end.
There was one last battle to win. Then there would be peace
across the Roman Empire.
The man walked through the sun-warmed Spanish field, his hand
touching the wheat. He looked past apple trees to a farmhouse.
He heard a child laughing somewhere near. A bird flew onto the
branch of a tree close to him and they looked at each other. The
man smiled.
Suddenly, the sound of shouts and horses frightened the bird
and it flew up into the air. The noise broke through the man’s
daydream and he came back to the real world with a crash. He
was not dressed in farmer’s clothes, as he had imagined, but in the
proud armor of the Roman army. The field was burnt and
muddy from battle, without a green leaf on it.
Beyond the tree line ahead, somewhere in the forest, the
German armies were preparing to attack again. The man knew
that behind him an enormous army waited. The Roman army,
40,000 men, his army. Maximus the farmer was Maximus the
Commanding General of the Army of the North for one more
* Caesar: the title given to the Roman Emperor.
† A.D.: after the birth of Christ.
1battle. One last battle, and then he could go home to Spain.
He turned his horse and rode back to his men. Thirty-year-old
Maximus was a great general—a man they could trust. He moved
among them, checking that they were ready for battle. He looked
back frequently to the line of trees.
Some of his officers were warming themselves around a fire,
and Maximus joined them.
“Still nothing?” he asked Quintus, his second-in-command.
Quintus shook his head. “He’s been gone for almost two
hours,” he said. “Why are they taking so long? They only have to
say yes or no.”
A young officer gave Maximus a bowl of hot soup. He drank it
slowly as they talked, always keeping one eye on the line of trees.
“Snow in the air,” said Maximus. “I can smell it.”
“Anything’s better than this German rain,” Quintus said,
looking out at the mud in front of his men.
Suddenly, there was a shout. “He’s coming!”
All eyes turned to the trees. A horseman rode out, toward the
Roman army. There was something strange about the way he was
riding. Maximus was the first to understand.
“They say no,” he said.
As the horse came closer, the other men could see what had
happened. The Roman messenger was tied to his horse. His head
had been cut off. Maximus knew now what he had to do. Life
was suddenly simple.
Far away, at the edge of the trees, a German chief appeared. In
one hand he was holding the head of the messenger. He
screamed his anger at the Roman army, then threw the head
toward them.
Maximus’s men stared back and waited for their general’s
order to attack.
2Several carriages traveled along the road toward the battle area,
protected by Roman soldiers. Inside the first carriage were the
royal family—the Emperor’s son and daughter. Twenty-eight-year-
old Commodus and his beautiful older sister Lucilla were dressed
in rich, warm clothes. They had left Rome two weeks before.
“Do you think he’s really dying?” Commodus asked Lucilla.
“He’s been dying for ten years,” she replied.
“I think he’s really sick this time. And he’s sent for us.” He
pointed to the following carriages. “He sent for the senators, too.
If he isn’t dying, why does he want to see them?”
“Commodus, you’re giving me a headache. Two weeks on the
road with you is more than enough,” said Lucilla, impatiently.
Commodus moved closer to her. “No, he’s made his decision,”
he said. “He will name me as Emperor. And I know what I shall
do first. I shall organize some games . . .”
“I shall have a hot bath,” said Lucilla.
The carriage stopped. Commodus stepped down and spoke to
one of the guards.
“We are almost there, sir.”
“Good,” said Commodus. “Bring me my horse.”
Under his warm traveling coat Commodus was wearing
Roman armor. He looked handsome and brave, the perfect
picture of a new, young emperor. The guard brought Commodus
his horse.
“Take me to my father. And take my sister to the camp.”
Commodus reached out a hand to Lucilla. “Kiss,” he said, smiling
like a little boy.
Lucilla brushed his fingers with her lips, then watched him
ride away.
Marcus Aurelius, Emperor of Rome, sat on his horse and stared at
the army below. His hair and beard were white, but only his eyes
3really showed his age and state of health. Marcus knew he was
dying and soon he must name the next emperor. But first this
battle must be won.
From another hill, Maximus also looked down onto the
Roman army. His men were ready to fight.
The German soldiers started to move out from the trees.
There were thousands of them, dressed in animal skins, shouting
at their Roman enemies.
Maximus bent down from his horse and took some earth in
his hands, as he did before every battle. Then he let it fall through
his fingers. It was a sign his men had seen many times before and
they knew what it meant. Maximus gave the command and a
flaming arrow shot into the sky. Hundreds more followed.
Thousands of German soldiers rushed forward and met the
first line of Romans. The air was filled with the sound of
screaming as more arrows landed and men from both armies died
terrible deaths.
Maximus led soldiers on horseback into the battle at the same
time as 5,000 Roman foot soldiers moved forward from another
side. Each man marched behind a large shield, each carried a
sword. The Germans were caught between two walls of death.
Above them the sky was full of flaming arrows. They were
fighting for their lives.
Suddenly, Maximus was trapped between two Germans. He
swung his sword around in a circle, striking both men dead. Then
he rode forward again, and his sword cut through the enemy
soldiers in his path.
Maximus’s horse suddenly fell forward, a German sword in its
neck. The General flew over his horse’s head and crashed to the
ground. There was danger all around him, but he continued
fighting. He found the Roman flag, still in the hand of a dead
soldier, and held it high. His men fought their way toward it and
defended their position bravely.
4More and more Roman soldiers moved forward onto the
battleground. They were well-trained and had the best
equipment and armor. The Germans were not as good as the
confident Roman army and finally they began to tire. Maximus
saw that he was winning and moved up a little higher on the hill.
From there he could see and command his men better. The
enemy began to lose confidence and some turned and ran. More
joined them and soon the only Germans on the battlefield were
dead or dying.
Maximus went back down and walked among them. As he
stepped over bodies, he began to relax and let his sword arm fall to
his side. Behind him, a dying German suddenly lifted himself from
the ground and rushed forward with his sword. Maximus was
calling an order to one of his officers when he saw the sudden look
of terror on the officer’s face and immediately swung his sword
around, cutting off his attacker’s head. There was so much power
behind the sword that it flew from his hand and landed in a tree.
Maximus had no strength left to pull it out again. The battle
had ended. As he looked at the dead around him, he could only
think that his men had won, and he had lived.
Chapter 2 The Last Battle
Emperor Marcus Aurelius sat on his horse, on the top of the
command hill, with guards on each side to protect him. He
watched as the battle slowly progressed and it became clear that
the Roman army had won. Marcus hoped it would be many
years before they had to go to war again, certainly not before he
died. He had no wish to see another battle. He turned to his
guards. “I will leave now,” he said. “I have seen enough.”
Maximus looked at his sword in the tree. His face was covered
with blood and mud. The beat of his heart was beginning to slow
5down as the noise of the battle became quieter. There were other
sounds now—screams from the dying and cries for help.
A small bird flew down from the top of the tree and sat on
Maximus’s sword. Could it possibly be the same bird he had seen
before the first explosion of battle? That seemed like a hundred
years ago. He shook his head and reached for the sword. The
frightened bird flew away as Maximus pulled his sword out of
the tree.
Across the field, doctors were trying to help any Roman
soldiers who were still alive. Other soldiers were walking slowly
through the men on the ground, looking for Germans left alive
and killing them quickly.
Maximus walked back toward the command point, sometimes
stopping to speak to a dying soldier, sometimes calling for water
or medical help. He came to a low hill where the bodies of
Roman soldiers had been placed, side by side.
“Let the sun always be warm on your back,” he said softly.
“You’ve come home at last.”
“You’re a brave man, Maximus, and a good commander,” said
a voice behind him. “Let us hope it is for the last time.”
Maximus turned and saw the Emperor. “There’s no one left to
fight, sir,” he said.
“There are always people to fight. More glory.”
“The glory is theirs, Caesar,” said Maximus, looking at the
lines of dead soldiers.
“Tell me,” said Marcus. “How can I reward Rome’s greatest
general?”
“Let me go home,” replied Maximus, quickly.
“Ah, home . . .” said Marcus. He gave his arm to Maximus, and
they walked together back across the battlefield.
All eyes followed the long purple coat and white hair of their
emperor. They could see that he moved slowly and with
difficulty. He was clearly in pain. Most of the soldiers realized that
